---
layout: post
title: My Reoccurring Dream of Stealing Away From Military
comments: true
tags: [psychology]
---
I had the same dream for years. Once maybe every few months. In it I was in the military. However, actually, I did not really belong there. Not that I really was a soldier or that I had intentionally joined the forces, but me being there was in fact based on a mistake. Yet, I was not able to articulate myself. So the only option left to me in the dream was to steal away in secrecy.<span class="more"></span>

After waking up the dream always left me in a shocked, confused and sad state. No matter how much I tried to analyze it, neither did I manage to understand it nor did I observe any change. At one point I decided to immediately write this dream down whenever it occurred.  
So I did. As time went by I started to realize something I had not been aware of from the beginning: The dream changed. Over the months and years there was a definite direction into which the dream contents moved. At first there was still this feeling of not being heard, not being able to make clear where I belonged (not in the military!). And then steal away at night. At a later stage though I started actually at least trying to point out the obvious mistake to my superiors. Still without success. The more time went by the more self-conscious I became. At some point I did no longer steal away secretly but consciously walked away. After telling my superiors (and showing actual proof) that I were not a member of the military forces. Years later I did not even bother anymore to tell them, I laughed in their faces right away and let them think me whatever they wanted. Then I would take my leave in full sight.  

Still, I was not satisfied. Yes, I had gained a lot of inner strength and even found a certain dark humor in the uncomfortable situation. Nevertheless walking away from all those soldiers left me with a stale feeling. Not that I felt obliged to them in any way, though inside I had always felt pretty lonely doing so.  
Hence, I started looking for new solutions. I still wrote down every occurrence of the dream. I inquired why I actually walked away in every occurrence of the dream. Was that really necessary? It took me a lot more work to get behind my motives to walk away. I have to say I had always found the military to be a rather despicable bunch. By the way, I say that with the awareness of someone who actually spent time in the military. I did not do the full service though, at some point I switched to the civil service and went to work for a humanitarian aid organization in Tanzania. A decision that I never regretted. However, that's another story.  
It took me much more time to realize that in my dreams I had always had a suppressed desire to actually belong to the rest of the military forces, to share comraderie, cooperation etc. The last times I had the dream I deliberately kept on the uniform although I still did not really belong there. I stayed there even though I did not have to.

What I learned is that there indeed exist these psychological and subconscious undercurrents in our lives. Dreams are a way of getting access to them. Certain ones of these themes may probably reoccurr through our whole life, I am sure that there are other people out there who happen to have their own reoccurring dreams. I encourage everyone to start writing them down whenever they occurr and see whether they change throughout time.